M0269MD-233 Debug GUI Performances Issues (#674)
MicroEJ/docs: Tutorials/tutorialDebugGUIperformancesIssues.rst

Using recent version of UI libraries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Using the latest UI libraries (MicroUI, MWT, Widget, etc) available may solve some performances issues. The most recent UI libraries fix some bugs that may affect performance and they provide tools/libraries that allow to implement more performant UIs.

Memory management
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Java management of memory may affect UI performances:

- Too much memory allocation/deallocation for UI resources (Images, Fonts).
- Too much objects intanciation will lead to a big Java heap size. In some usecases the garbage collection may lead to the UI slowing down.

To avoid those pitfalls:

- Calibrate the memories (Java heap, Images heap, etc).
- Uses Memory debugging tools:

  - :ref:`Optimize Memory Footprint<tutorial_optimize_memory_footprint>` tutorial.
  - :ref:`Memory inspection tools<tutorial_discover_embedded_debugging_techniques.tools.memory_inspection>`.
  - :ref:`Heap Analyzer<heapdumper>`.

Causes of UI bad performances
-----------------------------

The process to render a frame of the UI consists of several parts:

> - Drawing of the UI

Reviewer: Drawing of the UI:

>   - MWT processing (layout of widgets and widget rendering process)

Author: Fixed

  - Drawing of the UI (MicroUI drawing method execution)

- Display flush
- (depends on the UI port) Backbuffer copy, see :ref:`Display Buffer Modes<section_display_modes>`. 

This tutorial focuses on reducing processing time for the "Drawing of the UI" parts. To get more information about the other parts, please see the VEE Porting Guide :ref:`Graphical User Interface<pack_gui>` section.

SystemView
~~~~~~~~~~

The SystemView tool can be used to trace the UI actions (drawings, flush, etc) and detect which ones are the more time consuming. The documentation of SystemView is available :ref:`here<systemview>`. The MicroUI traces should be configured in SystemView in order to see the UI actions performed, it can be done by following :ref:`this documentation<microui_traces>`. Custom traces can be added and logged from the Java application to record specific actions.

Format of UI resources
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The format of UI resources should be chosen according to the usecase. Choosing the best resource format will reduce memory consumption and reduce drawing time.

Author: Changed

:ref:`This documentation<section_image_display_output>` explains the different images formats.

Widget hierarchy and layout
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Keeping the widget hierarchy as simple as possible will help reducing the "MWT processing" part time. Improving the widgets hierarchy design may help reducing the number of widgets or the number of them that are rendered when a certain part of the UI is updated.

Author: Fixed

.. _tutorials_debug_gui_performances:

How to debug GUI performance issue
==================================

> This document explains how to debug Graphical User Interface performances issues. It describes common pitfalls that can affect GUI performances, provides tools that allow to detect performances issues causes and how to solve them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document explains how to debug Graphical User Interface performance issues. It describes common pitfalls that can affect GUI performances and provides tools to detect performance issues and how to solve them.

```

Author: I removed the "s" from "performances" but did not applied the other suggestions as the writing is already correct.

General good coding practices
-----------------------------

> Before using more advanced UI debugging techniques, the global application code quality should be reviewed. An overall good code quality will help to get good UI performances. It will help getting more efficient code and allow easier debugging and maintenance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before using more advanced UI debugging techniques, the global application code quality should be reviewed. Good code quality will help to get good UI performances. It will help to have more efficient code and allow easier debugging and maintenance.

```

Author: I replaced "help getting" by "help to get". I kept "An overall good..." as this is correct

Documents and tools to improve application code quality
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Here is a list of documents or tools that help improving the quality of application code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is a list of documents or tools that help improve the quality of application code:

```

Author: Fixed

- The :ref:`Improve the Quality of Java Code<improve_code_quality>` tutorial explains how to improve the Quality of Java Code.

> - The :ref:`Get Started With GUI<tutorial_get_started_with_gui>` tutorial provides guidelines to start developping an efficient GUI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The :ref:`Get Started With GUI<tutorial_get_started_with_gui>` tutorial provides guidelines to develop efficient GUI.

```

Author: Fixed

> - The `SonarQube™<https://github.com/MicroEJ/ExampleTool-Sonar>`_ source code quality analyzer allows to analyze an Application or Library code quality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `SonarQube™<https://github.com/MicroEJ/ExampleTool-Sonar>`_ source code quality analyzer to analyze an Application or Library code quality.

```

Author: Not fixed, the current writing is correct

Using recent version of UI libraries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Using the latest UI libraries (MicroUI, MWT, Widget, etc) available may solve some performances issues. The most recent UI libraries fix some bugs that may affect performance and they provide tools/libraries that allow to implement more performant UIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The latest UI libraries (MicroUI, MWT, Widget, etc.) may solve some performance issues. The most recent UI libraries fix some bugs that may affect performance and provide tools/libraries to implement more performant UIs.

```

Author: Just removed the "s" from "performances" the rest is correct

Memory management
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Java management of memory may affect UI performances:

- Too much memory allocation/deallocation for UI resources (Images, Fonts).
- Too much objects intanciation will lead to a big Java heap size. In some usecases the garbage collection may lead to the UI slowing down.

To avoid those pitfalls:

- Calibrate the memories (Java heap, Images heap, etc).

> - Uses Memory debugging tools:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Uses memory debugging tools:

```

Author: Fixed

  - :ref:`Optimize Memory Footprint<tutorial_optimize_memory_footprint>` tutorial.
  - :ref:`Memory inspection tools<tutorial_discover_embedded_debugging_techniques.tools.memory_inspection>`.
  - :ref:`Heap Analyzer<heapdumper>`.

Causes of UI bad performances
-----------------------------

The process to render a frame of the UI consists of several parts:

> - Drawing of the UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Drawing of the UI:

```

Author: Fixed

.. _tutorials_debug_gui_performances:

> How to debug GUI performance issue

Reviewer 3: make a whole pass on capitalized titles => https://docs.cross/howto/conventions.html#corporate-guidelines
```suggestion
How to Debug GUI Performance Issue

```

MicroUI Flush Visualizer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A perfect application has 100% of its display area drawn. This is the total area covered by the sum of the area drawn by the drawing operations. A value of 200% indicates the area drawn is equivalent to twice the surface of the entire display. A total area drawn between 100% to 200% is the norm in practice because widgets often overlap. However, if the total area drawn is bigger than 200%, that means that the total surface of the display was drawn more than twice, meaning that a lot of time could be spent drawing things that are never shown.

The MicroUI Flush Visualizer tool can be used to investigate potential performance bottlenecks in UI applications running on the Simulator by showing the pixel surface drawn between two MicroUI frame buffer flushes.

The documentation of MicroUI Flush Visualizer is available :ref:`here<microuiflushvisualizer>`.

Hardware and low-level investigation tips
-----------------------------------------

> Regardless the GUI application in development, it may be possible that the rootcause of low performances of the GUI is located at the low-level of the system.

Author: ```suggestion
Regardless of the GUI application in development, it may be possible that the root cause of low performances of the GUI is located at the low-level of the system.

```

This section provides insights of main spots to check regarding the low-level and the hardware. 

At project level
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Compiling optimization options
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Ensure that your project is configured to bring the best performances with compiling optimization options correctly setup.

Author: ```suggestion
Ensure that your project is configured to bring the best performances with compiling optimization options correctly set up.

```

RTOS tasks environment
++++++++++++++++++++++

Please check that the priority of the UI task is high enough to avoid too many preemptions that may induce bad UI performances.

> Another point to watch in this field is the amount of other tasks that are running in the same time than the UI task.

Author: ```suggestion
Another point to watch in this field is the amount of other tasks that are running at the same time than the UI task.

```

Indeed, it may be possible that the total workload is too high for the CPU, therefore, the UI task cannot get access to the required amount of computing power.

At hardware level
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Hardware capabilities
+++++++++++++++++++++

> MCUs and SoCs may have access to various hardware IPs to speedup the UI. Be sure your UI port exploit all of them.

Author: ```suggestion
MCUs and SoCs may have access to various hardware IPs to speedup the UI. Be sure your UI port exploits all of them.

```

First of all, check that your system has a GPU and use it if it's the case.
Then, driving a display implies an intensive memory usage, verify that you use a DMA whenever it's possible.

> For example, during the back copy if the flush policy is switch or during your flush if your display is driven through SPI (if there is a DMA dedicated to the SPI port).

Author: ```suggestion
For example, during the back copy if the flush policy is switched or during your flush if your display is driven through SPI (if there is a DMA dedicated to the SPI port).

```

> For more information about flush policy, please read our documentation about :ref:`section_display`.

Author: ```suggestion
For more information about the flush policy, please read our documentation about :ref:`section_display`.

```

Hardware configuration
++++++++++++++++++++++

Each of your hardware components such as SPI, DMA or LCD controller must be configured to bring the best performances achievable.
This implies to read carefully the datasheet of the MCU and the display and determine for example the best frequency, communication mode possible.

Another example of configuration with DMAs, a DMA has often a burst mode to transfer data, ensure that you use this mode to maximize performances.

Buffers location in memory
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

An important step during the development of the UI integration is the memory location of the buffers that will use the GUI to draw to the display.

> In a MCU, you may have the choice between different types of RAM that have different properties in terms of quantity and speed.

Author: ```suggestion
In an MCU, you may have the choice between different types of RAM that have different properties in terms of quantity and speed.

```

> Please always prefer the fastest RAM whenever its size allow it.

Author: ```suggestion
Please always prefer the fastest RAM whenever its size allowd it.

```

At flush level
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Flush policy
++++++++++++

As described in the :ref:`section_display` page, there are several flush policies that can be implemented.

> Check that the flush policy selected is the best according your hardware capabilities. Generally, the best flush policy is the switch mode.

Author: ```suggestion
Check that the flush policy selected is the best according to your hardware capabilities. Generally, the best flush policy is the switch mode.

```
